---
abstract: |
    Historically, agriculturalists were a hegemonic group protected by norms
    and institutions since colonial times. However, the emergence of the
    industrial sector imposed tight constraints on the way politics was run
    by the incumbent landowning class, forcing both political elites to make
    institutional agreements. I identify one such compromise, the
    implementation of the income tax. When the income tax was implemented
    under politically contested circumstances, this institution was
    crystallized within a series of reforms that replaced the old
    institutional order inherited since colonial times. I argue that this
    new institutional order fostered long-run economic development. Using
    the Chilean case to illustrate the causal mechanisms at work and
    time-series econometric techniques in a number of Latin American
    countries I find that before the income tax law the institutional order
    was designed to give unfair economic advantages to the agricultural
    sector. When political contestation was high, the implementation of the
    income tax put countries in a path of long-run economic development.
    However, when political contestation was low, the income tax did not
    reflect this early foundational sectoral cleavage. In these cases, the
    levels of sectoral conflict were low, and agricultural elites were never
    challenged. An untransformed elite structure permitted then unbalanced
    growth reinforcing the political and economic advantages of the landed
    elites.
author:
- |
    <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Héctor Bahamonde</span>\
    [^1] PhD Candidate $\bullet$ Political Science Dpt. $\bullet$ Rutgers
    University\
    `e:`[`hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu`](mailto:hector.bahamonde@rutgers.edu)\
    `w:`[`www.hectorbahamonde.com`](http://www.hectorbahamonde.com)
bibliography:
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/Bahamonde_BibTex2013.bib'
- '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/library.bib'
csl: '/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Bibliografia_PoliSci/APA_Style.csl'
...

Sectoral Conflicts and Development
==================================

The literature on political and economic development is vast. Without
trying to survey all of it, there seems to be an agreement in that
strong institutions cause better economic performance. For example
@North:1990vl [3] asserts that the idea that “institutions affect the
performance of economies is hardly controversial.” However, most
explanations focus property rights protection.[^2] I find that this is a
limitation since regimes that do not respect property rights (for
example, dictatorships) grow at levels that sometimes even surpass
democratic countries. While I still think that institutions matter for
economic growth, this paper seeks to contribute to this literature by
introducing an additional channel, particularly, emphasizing the role of
sectoral conflicts on political and economic development. I build on the
*fiscal sociology* paradigm to argue that fiscal institutions, which are
the engine of state-*making*, are product of a sectoral conflict. In
turn, borrowing from the *dual sector* model I document how the secular
structural transformation (i.e. the gradual emergence of the industrial
sector) triggered a major political transformation reversing the
backward institutional order implemented since colonial times (and
sustained by the landowning class), producing long-term balanced
economic growth. More generally, this paper explains how political
development is associated with economic growth. I use sectoral outputs
from $1900$ to $2009$ to proxy the emergence of the industrial sector in
a number of Latin American countries,[^3] vector autoregressive models
(VAR), Granger-causality tests, impulse response functions (IRFs) and
the Chilean case to illustrate the causal mechanisms. The results
suggest that long-term economic development is channeled through
sectoral contestation and institutional investments, particularly the
expansion of the fiscal system.

The political development literature has traditionally focused on
socio-economic cleavages and potential alliances between a *homogeneous*
ruling elite and politically excluded segments of the society,
traditionally peasants or other disenfranchised groups such as the
bourgeoisie. @Moore:1966tn, @Tilly:1992rr, @Boix:2003db,
@Stasavage:2008fr and @Acemoglu:1996rm are among the most prominent
examples supporting this view.[^4] In this paper I focus on political
divisions *among* the elite. The elite-sector approach is hardly new.
Just to mention some examples, @Ansell:2014ty and @Boix:2015aa examine
the role of economic inequality/equality among the elite on
democratization, @Saylor:2014aa [8] looks at the “coalitional basis of
state building,” @Mares2015 examine how income taxation in Europe is
associated with inter-elite conflicts, particularly between the landed
elite and the industrial elite. While political economists have already
recognized the relevance of sectoral conflicts and the structure of the
economy, the focus has been on democratic development. Using the same
sectoral approach as a starting point, the paper stresses how these
structural conflicts are associated with institutional and economic
development.

![Causal Mechanism\[causal:mechanism:fig:p2\]](causal_path.pdf)

An elite divided on an *economic* cleavage should at the same time be
divided on their *political* preferences, particularly regarding their
attitudes towards taxation.[^5] Taxation affects landowners and
industrialists in different ways.[^6] Agriculturalists will
systematically resist it as land fixity increases the risk premium of
their main asset.[^7] In contrast, industrialists’ preferences toward
taxation are more elastic as capital can be reinvested in nontaxable
sectors.[^8] However, class conflicts are more likely to resolve in
favor of direct taxation when income inequality *among the elite* is
low.[^9] When inequality among the elite is high, there are no
incentives to cooperate, and rather the leading elite rules in a
monopolistic way. However, given that similar degrees of sectoral
economic development can be converted into armies of similar
capabilities,[^10] elites will have incentives to make agreements rather
than engaging in conflict when their economic/military capacities are
similar. When levels of inter-elite inequality are low, war is more
likely to exhaust all existent assets without producing positive
outcomes for either sector,[^11] generating then pressures to reach
agreements instead of engaging in armed conflicts.

I argue that the emergence of the industrial sector lowered the levels
of inter-sectoral inequality making possible higher levels of
inter-sectoral contestation, forcing industrial and agricultural
political elites to make institutional agreements, causing in turn
long-term economic growth. I identify one such compromise, the
implementation of the income tax. Elsewhere I have argued that the rise
of the industrial sector accelerated the implementation of the income
tax law,[^12] causing a long-lasting positive impact on state
institutions and political development.[^13] In this paper I study how
the implementation of the income tax in the presence of high sectoral
conflicts set states in a path of political development causing
long-term *modern* (i.e. ‘balanced’) economic growth (see ). While
balanced growth (end of causal chain) implies the expansion of the
industrial sector (beginning of causal chain), the expansion of the
industrial sector does not imply balanced growth. Balanced growth
implies a much deeper long-run relationship of sectoral
inter-dependence. However, mere industrial expansion could be
short-lived. Although @Bahamonde:2017ab studies the *timing* of the
implementation of the income tax as a function of the emergence of the
industrial sector, here I present an argument centered on the
*long-lasting consequences on economic growth* of the implementation an
income tax (when it responded to sectoral conflicts/bargains). Since the
economy alters the balance of political power, this theory is relevant
for explaining political development too (circular arrows at the end of
the causal chain). The political significance of balanced growth is that
when both sectors expand in a balanced fashion (which does not
necessarily mean similar growth rates), it *reinforces* the need to
sustain levels of political cooperation (backward arrows in ). The crux
of the argument is that the economic structural transformation
characterized by “a secular decline of agriculture and substantial
expansion of manufacturing”[^14] imposed tight constraints on the way
politics was run by the incumbent landowning class. In that sense, this
paper considers that given that each economic sector has a corresponding
political arm, the *sectoral* conflict is also a *political*
conflict.[^15] Consequently, these gradual long-term changes not only
altered the structure of the economy but also the institutional order.

Adopting the fiscal sociology paradigm, I contend that tax institutions
as conflictual devices *made* the state, improving not only bureaucratic
development but also expanding the *dominion* of the state, fostering in
turn institutional development. Analytically, this theory speaks to a
broader conceptualization of the role of inter-elite (in)equality on
political and economic (under)development. I find that in cases where
the income tax was introduced in reaction to the early emergence of a
strong industrial sector, the implementation of this institution
reversed the institutional order that had permitted an economic
backwardness equilibrium inherited since colonial times. In these
circumstances, the implementation of the income tax law was product of a
sectoral compromise between two equally powerful elites, allowing the
inclusion of both groups in the state-making projects. My analyses
suggest that before the income tax law, when the landowning elites ruled
in a monopolistic way, institutions were designed to give unfair
economic advantages to the agricultural sector. However, in contested
scenarios, the implementation of the tax was associated with the
reversal of the old institutional order, causing long-term economic
growth. In contrast, when the elite structure and levels of sectoral
conflict were weak, the income tax did not reflect the sectoral conflict
but other forces. For instance, the implementation of the income tax law
in Chile happened very early, in 1924, just at the time when there were
lower levels of inter-sectoral inequality, securing the inclusion of
both groups in the implementation of a series of investments in state
institutions. In fact, the Chilean revenue service is among the finest
tax institutions in Latin America. However, Guatemala imposed the income
tax law very late, in 1963, and by 1967 the national income tax office
employed 194 people, and only 9 of whom had graduated from college.[^16]
While Guatemala implemented the tax, the institution did not reflect the
preferences of both sectors. In fact, the law responded more to
exogenous forces. Particularly, the law was implemented by the US-backed
dictator Colonel Enrique Peralta Azurdia, not necessarily reflecting the
inter-sectoral domestic dynamics. In these kinds of scenarios,
landowners were never challenged and there were less pressures to
centralize the state, making further institutional investments less
likely. In these kinds of scenarios, landowners were never challenged
and there were less pressures to centralize the state, making further
institutional investments less likely. Hence, even though in these cases
the income tax was implemented, the tax did not reflect the *early
foundational sectoral cleavage*, compromising long-run economic
development by crystallizing the old institutional order inherited since
colonial times. Consequently, the income tax is a necessary but not
sufficient cause of development as it requires the presence of high
sectoral conflicts to cause economic development.[^17]

Next explains the dual sector model, explaining how balanced growth
happens, why it does not mean ‘equal’ growth, why it does not imply the
absolute decline of the agricultural sector, and why it is important for
political development. Then I provide some historical using the Chilean
case to illustrate the theory. Using the fiscal sociology paradigm, I
try to pay especial attention to how the series of inter-elite bargains
that surrounded the implementation of the income tax fostered
institutional development and state-*making*. Next, I present some
econometric , putting especial attention to the relationship between
institutional development, particularly, fiscal expansion and long-term
balanced growth. Lastly, I provide some final .

Structural Transformations and the Dual Sector Economy Model {#dual:sector}
============================================================

The *dual sector* or *balanced growth* model explains the mechanics of
economic modern growth[^18] by emphasizing the importance of
macro-structural gradual transformations. The model argues that the
economic system is divided into two sectors loosely defined as ‘advanced
or modern sector’ or ‘manufacturing sector,’ and as ‘backward or
traditional sector,’ or ‘agriculture.’[^19] The basic intuition of this
paradigm is that in order for the industrial sector to develop, it needs
*first* an efficient and strong agricultural sector. As I explain later,
contingent on efficient agricultural productivity, the industrial sector
goes from a low-productivity sector to high-productivity, eventually
surpassing the agricultural sector. If the agricultural sector lacks
economic efficiency, the industrial sector will hardly develop, leaving
the country in an economic trap. This literature is vast. While in this
section I explain the core of it, there are many current theoretical and
methodological applications as well as extensions of the dual sector
model. Just to name a few examples, @Thirlwall1986, @Mathur1990,
@Hatton1991, @Blunch2006, @Tiffin2003, @Kanwar2000 and @McArthur2017
study sectoral growth, shock persistence, and other related topics using
the same theoretical framework and methodology I employ in this paper
(or some variation of it). Notably, @Ansell:2014ty use this model in
political science to explain democratization. This paper links
decreasing levels of inter-elite inequality with balance growth and
inter-elite political contestation.

It was @Lewis:1965nr [151] who popularized the idea that “\[t\]he secret
of most development problems is to maintain a proper balance between
sectors.” The dual nature of the economy has been widely accepted and
forms part of “a long tradition in development economics.”[^20] And
while dichotomizing the entire economy in just two sectors might sound
as too much of an oversimplification,[^21] I follow @Dixit:1973aa [325]
in that the dual economy model provides a significantly better
description of the economy because “it reflects several vital social
*and* economic distinctions.”[^22] @Johnston1966 [280] also explain that
“\[t\]he reality found in most underdeveloped countries approximates
this dichotomy \[...\] sufficiently.” In fact, @Lindert1985 [354]
explain that the dual-sector model is “the dominant paradigm used by
Third World observers.” However, “balanced growth is almost axiomatic as
a desirable objective, for both developed *and* under-developed
countries.”[^23] For example, @Bergquist1986 [8] explains that
“Colombia’s two traditional political parties crystallized in the 1840’s
and reflected in many respects the dual nature of the Colombian
economy.” While this is a stylized model, @Dixit:1973aa [326] is right
in that a “major drawback of dualistic theories \[...\] is the total
neglect of the service sector.” However, the literature is consistent in
that the third sector necessarily develops *after* the industrial sector
is developed.[^24]

Economic development depends on the emergence of the industrial sector
which in turn depends on the development of a productive agricultural
sector.[^25] As @Kuznets1961a [59] puts it, “economic growth is
*impossible* unless there is a substantial rise in product per worker in
the agricultural sector.”[^26] Following @Jorgenson1961 [311],
@Ranis:1964uq [59], @Jorgenson1967 [291], @Skott1998 [279-280] and
@Vollrath2009a [290], the industrial sector is assumed to use capital
and labor (having both increasing returns to scale). And while the
agriculture sector also needs capital,[^27] I follow conventional wisdom
in development economics and assume that agriculture uses land (which is
fixed) as the main input, and labor. This implies that the industrial
sector is *structurally* advantaged: the fixity of land requires
countries to industrialize in order to grow, and for that they need
first an efficient agricultural sector. This insight is shared by many
other development economists. @Hayami1969 [105] for example argue that
“\[i\]ndustrialization and modern economic growth are basically
*conditioned* by the level of agricultural productivity.”[^28] There are
two main reasons for why agricultural development is a prerequisite of
industrial development: efficient agricultures are more likely to supply
the industrial sector with cheap foodstuff and cheap labor. In
@Johnston1951 [498]’s words, “\[e\]xpanded agricultural productivity
releases people from the land for employment in industry \[and\]
provides food for the growing population.” This structural
transformation is the key of economic growth. If the expansion of the
agricultural sector is compromised, it will necessarily compromise the
expansion of the industrial sector as well.[^29] The political correlate
is that a weak inter-sectoral economic cleavage engenders a weak
*political* elite structure. Since agriculturalists were an economic
hegemonic group protected by norms and institutions that originated in
colonial times, slow industrial sectors left agricultural political
elites uncontested,[^30] compromising both political, and economic
development - as I explain here. Thus, this argument speaks to a broader
theory of general development. As @Hechter1980a [1085] explain, “state
formation will be more likely to the degree that powerful individual
actors form two groups on the basis of divergent economic and political
interests.” Here I explain how these sectoral dynamics helped to form
the Latin American state.

The first reason for why a productive agricultural sector is key to
industrial development is that more efficient agricultural techniques
make agricultural production less labor intensive, allowing landowners
to free workers which the industrial sector can rely on. The need for an
improvement in agricultural production as a necessary step prior to
industrialization “has been termed the ‘prerequisite’ hypothesis.”[^31]
Technologies such as “crop rotation, pest control, seed breeding \[and\]
fertilizer use \[represent\] the major potential source of agricultural
labor productivity,”[^32] increasing also “non-agricultural value added
per worker.”[^33] @Nicholls1961 [339-340] shows that advanced industrial
countries initially had relatively more developed and productive
agricultural sectors. In fact, @Gallo:1991kx [57] finds that in Bolivia,
*a primarily agricultural economy*, “\[t\]he tools employed in
production were few and rudimentary, the use of fertilizers was minimal,
and methods for conservation of the soil were practically unknown until
the beginning of the 1950s.” However, highly industrialized countries
such as Japan, the U.K., the U.S.S.R. and Taiwan adopted *prior
industrialization* very efficient agricultural technologies such as
higher-yielding varieties, fertilizers and other activities that
improved farm practices.[^34]

Surplus of labor naturally leads to a reallocation of redundant workers
into the industrial sector, which is the crux of economic
development.[^35] @Nurkse:1953aa in fact argues that development *means*
to employ the surplus labor.[^36] The literature coincides in that the
‘natural role’ of the agricultural sector is to provide labor to the
industrial sector.[^37] For example, @Dixit:1973aa [326] argues that the
“agricultural sector *must* fulfill \[...\] its dual role of supplier of
labour to industry and of food for the industrial labour force.”[^38]
While @Lewis1954 in his canonical work argued that there existed an
‘unlimited’ supply of agricultural labor, a word of caution is in order.
The meaning of the supposedly ‘unlimitedness’ of labor should *not* be
taken literally, as in reality means *redundant labor force*.[^39] In
fact, @Nurske:1961qr [225] points out that the concept “is commonly used
to denote all types of rural unemployment.”[^40]

The second reason for why a productive agricultural sector is key to
industrial development is because efficient techniques in agricultural
production are able to supply cheaper foodstuff.[^41] “It is
*self-evident* that without increasing food output, the capitalist
sector must remain in a stationary state.”[^42] Food surplus is a direct
consequence of efficiency, and it is just as important as labor
reallocation. In sum, as @Kuznets1961a [60] explains it, if “output per
worker in agriculture does not rise substantially, economic growth in
the first case will be stopped by scarcity of agricultural products, and
in the second case by scarcity of labour.”

Finally, it is important to say that “the agricultural sector declines
relative to the overall economy but continues to expand
absolutely.”[^43] In other words, it is the “the proportional
contribution of agriculture to the growth”[^44] that decays, implying
that in the long run the agricultural sector “must also grow,”[^45]
especially given the continuing dependence on a constant supply of
food.[^46] Consequently, balanced growth does not imply ‘equal’ growth,
but rather a long-run inter-sectoral dependence.

Dualism in Chile, a brief illustrative case\[chile:case\]
=========================================================

Historically, agriculturalists had been a hegemonic group protected by
norms and institutions that originated in colonial times. Those norms
had survived due to institutional inertia, perpetuating their advantaged
position.[^47] As @Collier:2002db [106] argue, the “national government
was dominated by \[...\] owners of large agricultural holdings,”[^48],
in turn @Zeitlin:1984aa [13] explains that “landowners controlled both
the vote and the labor power of the agrarian tenants \[and\] peasants
\[...\] and this was the *sine qua non* of their continuing political
hegemony.” Similarly, @Baland2008 [1748] explain that “\[c\]ongressional
representation was heavily weighted in favor of rural districts.” In the
presidency also, landowners were the single most represented group.[^49]

While on the one hand institutions, policies and other practices were
biased against industrial elites, on the other, rapid industrial growth
(see , top left) incentivized industrial elites to form pressure groups
to offset the bias against them. The little public infrastructure that
existed benefited the agricultural sector only. @Zeitlin:1984aa [41]
explains that “the Montt regime did invest in the construction of
Chile’s railways but only in the Central Valley and south-central zones
\[b\]ut there was no public investment \[...\] in railroads built in the
Norte Chico mining provinces.” To address this situation, industrialists
started to “form trade associations to engage in lobbying and
propaganda.”[^50] Eventually, these interests groups turned into
political parties.[^51] These new groups, backed by their economic
leverage, put pressures to open the political system in a way that
allowed industrial elites to gain egalitarian political conditions and
equal access to state power. While initially both elites confronted each
other in two civil wars,[^52] conflict was not sustainable over time.
Consequently, Chilean agricultural and industrial elites opted for a
political compromise. The keystone of these inter-elite compromises was
the implementation of the income tax in 1924, which marked the beginning
of an institutionalization path. As others have observed, industrialists
“accepted taxation, *while demanding state services and expecting to
influence how tax revenues were spent*.”[^53] This is why the expansion
of political rights *among the elite* and the rise of the industrial
sector shared the same timing. As @Collier1977 [683] has pointed out,
“the real story of Chilean industrialization belongs to the
Parliamentary period” (1891-1925).

The implementation of the income tax in Chile, as part of the sectoral
bargain, was then associated with the implementation of other state
institutions and services, expanding in this way the bureaucratic
*dominion* of the state. However, unlike other ‘regular’ state
institutions, taxing incomes *made* the state.[^54] It is the very
practice of this technology that gives the state the big push making it
able to continue the reproduction of its power. Critically, from the
elite’s perspective, it was in their interest to see these extractive
capacities grow. Taxation is more likely to survive as an institution
when it counts with the elite’s ‘blessing.’ @Boix:1999tj and
@Parente1994 explain how the development of certain institutions or the
adoption of certain technologies are implemented when they go in the
benefit of the elites. In turn, @Kurtz:2013aa [86] points out that state
expansion “must be reasonably understood as nonthreatening to the
fundamental material interests of nearly all politically relevant
fragments of the upper class.” In fact, for the Latin American case,
@Beramendi2016 argue that “capitalist elites \[*preferred*\] to shoulder
a higher tax burden through progressive direct taxation, which they
\[viewed\] as the least-worst economic option.”[^55] Fiscal sociologists
argue that the capacity the state has of taxing its subjects *diffuses*
to other state institutions via spillovers. For example @Musgrave1992
[99] argues that since taxation (especially of incomes) requires such a
high degree of state penetration, *public finances offer the key for a
theory of state-making*. Finally, @Bahamonde:2017ac finds that the
implementation of the income tax was associated with institutional
development and state expansion. Here I contend that the implementation
of such institutional order fostered economic growth, leveling the
economic and political power of both elites in the long-run. Under
balanced growth, the political consequence is that both sectors need one
another to grow, limiting the excessive power of one political elite
over the second political elite. And while agricultural growth declines
overtime, it continues to expand absolutely, preserving the political
balance between the two elites.

Time Series Analyses: Vector Autoregressive Models and Granger Causality Tests\[methods\]
=========================================================================================

#### Granger-causality Tests

The emergence of a new industrial sector created a new politically
disenfranchised elite who demanded political and economic reforms,
ending years of political asymmetries. The keystone of these inter-elite
compromises was the implementation of the income tax, setting countries
in a path of both political and long-run economic development. The
income tax, as an institution that contributed to develop further
institutional development, should then be associated with long-term
economic growth, and consequently with a secular relative decline of
agriculture and substantial relative expansion of manufacturing. To test
this hypothesis, the theory should pass a number of tests. As argued,
*before* the inter-sectoral compromises (i.e., before the income tax law
was implemented), political institutions and social norms inherited from
the colonial period were designed to allocate economic inputs in a way
that benefited the landowning class. Hence, I expect the transference of
economic inputs to go *from* the industrial sector *to* the agriculture
sector, an *economic backwardness equilibrium* as stated by the dual
sector model. In other words, I expect the agricultural sector to grow
*at expenses* of the industrial sector. However, *after* the income tax
was implemented, we should see a *reversal* of the flow of inputs,
generating growth *from* the agricultural sector *to* the industrial
sector (balanced growth). In this case, I expect the industrial sector
not to grow at expenses of agricultural development, but *because of*
agricultural development. As stated before, industrial growth *depends*
on agricultural growth. In econometric terms, we should see that the
income tax reversed the way in which one sector ‘Granger-caused’ the
other.[^56] @Lutkepohl2006 [42] explains that if some variable $X$
forecasts variable $Y$ (and not vise versa), $X$ is said to
‘Granger-cause’ $Y$. According to @Granger1980 [349], this concept of
‘causation’ is based on the idea “that the future cannot cause the
past.”[^57]

I utilize the [MOxLAD](http://moxlad-staging.herokuapp.com/home/en?)
data to test this, particularly the *agriculture value-added* and
*manufacturing value-added* variables.[^58] The dataset spans from as
early as $1900$ to as late as $2009$.[^59] specifies the available
time-spans. Using secondary information, the table also states *when*
the income tax was implemented, what the law was and its corresponding
source(s).[^60] Following @Mahoney:2010aa [5] I consider two ‘advanced’
economy countries (Chile and Argentina), two ‘intermediate’ countries
(Mexico and Colombia) and two ‘less advanced’ countries (Guatemala and
Nicaragua). shows the sectoral outputs for each country, both before and
after the income tax law was implemented.

In I test for Granger-causality, i.e. the direction in which economic
growth was produced both prior and after the implementation of the
income tax law.[^61] The results strongly suggest that the income tax
caused a structural transformation in (almost) all ‘developed’
countries, namely Chile, Colombia and Mexico. In all these cases the
income tax reversed the initial inter-sectoral growth equilibrium
suggesting a contested elite structure, as the case of Chile conveys.
Before the income tax law, industrial development Granger-caused
agricultural development, and after the income tax law, the agricultural
sector Granger-caused industrial development (all p-values are
significant at the $.05$ level).[^62] The data analyses suggest that the
implementation of the income tax was associated with a reversal of the
the economic structure, going from an economic backwardness equilibrium
to a balanced growth equilibrium. I interpret this change in the
mechanics of economic growth as the overthrowing of the political
institutions and practices that permitted agricultural expansion at the
expense of the modern sector. Following the fiscal sociology literature,
I contend that when the income tax was implemented under contexts of
sectoral contestation, this institution fostered the expansion of state
institutions. In turn, these kinds of institutions set in motion a path
of long-term economic development ().[^63] In Nicaragua and Guatemala
the tests suggest the exact opposite (all p-values are significant at
the $.05$ level).[^64] The implementation of the income tax in these
countries did *not* reverse the initial economic backwardness
equilibrium because when lately implemented, the tax did not reflect the
inter-sectoral tensions, challenges and compromises proper of the
contested political economies. The industrial sector never had enough
economic leverage to politically confront the landowning elite (see )
and hence industrialists never posed credible threats to the status quo,
relaxing the endogenous incentives to invest in state institutions. The
Argentinian case is different. The Granger tests are inconclusive, and
no significant results were found, suggesting a weak inter-sectoral
cleavage structure.

#### Vector Autoregressive Models (VAR) and Impulse Response Analysis (IRF)\[var:theory\]

Once we have determined the directionality of economic growth is
associated with the imposition of the income tax law, it is necessary to
establish the inter-sectoral long-run economic equilibrium. This section
then tests whether a change in political institutions (particularly, the
implementation of the income tax) is associated with long-run economic
development. This relationship is endogenous.[^65] If this endogeneity
is not accounted for, the error term and the regressors will be
correlated, and so OLS will be inconsistent. Additionally, growth rates
are usually integrated. ‘Unit root’ or ‘integrated’ *I(1)* vectors[^66]
are time-series that “wander” up and down, yet they never reverse to a
given mean.[^67] Simply put, integrated series are processes whose
deviations from the mean tend to persist, cumulating or growing in time.
In other words, these are series whose innovations do not dissipate, but
persist in time. And such, analysts usually study economic growth using
this methodological framework. Moreover, two integrated vectors that are
mutually endogenous (like industrial and agricultural growth) imply a
‘cointegrated’ CI(1) relationship, imposing additional statistical
restrictions.[^68] A “set of integrated time-series is said to be
cointegrated if some linear combination of the series in levels produces
a stationary series,” or *I(0)*.[^69] The economic literature generally
coincides in that economic growth is an I(1) process, and that sectoral
development is a CI(1) process.

Integration and cointegration are assumptions that should be tested. The
first step is to find strong evidence of integration in each of the
series. In I show several unit root tests.[^70] The table indicates that
all variables, periods, sectors and countries have I(1) processes. The
second step is to find evidence of cointegration.[^71] Substantively,
cointegration means that there is a long-lasting mutual inter-sectoral
economic *dependence*, allowing *both* sectors to grow in a balanced
fashion. Lack of evidence of cointegration implies coordination failures
between the two sectors (economic backwardness), the delayed emergence
of a political challenger, the lack of an economic/political
sectoral-based conflict, and consequently a politically unchallenged
landed elite. Given that the maximum number of cointegrated vectors in
bivariate cointegrated series is 1, I only test for the minimum number
of cointegrated relationships.[^72] I expect to find evidence of
cointegration only in the ‘developed’ cases. Following @Johansen1988,
indicates that all ‘developed’ and ‘semi-developed’ countries have
cointegrated series, while ‘less developed’ countries do not have
cointegrated series.[^73]

To estimate the long-run inter-sectoral economic growth relationship of
cointegrated vector, it is necessary “a particular kind of model.”[^74]
If traditional methods are used, given the interdependent relationship
of these kinds of time-series, the results will be spurious.[^75] I use
the vector-autoregressive approach (VAR) specified in @Johansen1988
which among several advantages, is estimated via MLE. Another advantage
is that VAR models do not need to specify the number of cointegrated
vectors as opposed to error correction models.[^76] Formally, I will
model the next reduced form VAR in differences, one per country, both
before and after the income tax law was passed:

$$\label{var:1}
  \begin{array}{ll}
    \bigtriangleup M_{t_{m}} = & \alpha_{m} + \beta_{m}  \bigtriangleup M_{t-l} + \beta_{m} \bigtriangleup A_{t-l} + \epsilon_{t_{m}} \\
    \bigtriangleup A_{t_{a}} = & \alpha_{a} + \beta_{a}  \bigtriangleup M_{t-l} + \beta_{a} \bigtriangleup A_{t-l} + \epsilon_{t_{a}}
  \end{array}$$

Notice that in both lines the different dependent variables are
expressed as a function of the *same* set of lagged independent
variables. Since the number of lags $l$ varies by country *and*
time-span (i.e. before/after the income tax law), is in standard form.
describes the optimal lag structure per each country regression.[^77]
Most tests give satisfactory results.

Given that “it is often difficult to draw any conclusions from the large
number of coefficient estimates in a VAR system,”[^78] econometricians
usually turn to the analyses of *impulse response functions* (IRFs),
which are derived from VAR analyses.[^79] “Impulse responses trace out
the response of current and future values of each of the variables to a
one-unit increase in the current value of one of the VAR errors.”[^80]
shows four panels for each of the six countries, one for the response of
agriculture to industrial growth (left column), one for the response of
industrial growth to agricultural growth (right column), both before
(top row) and after (bottom row) the implementation of the income tax. I
expect the income tax to reverse the traditional institutional order and
be associated with a path of long-run economic growth only in
politically ‘developed’ countries. Lack of sustained economic growth
after having implemented the income tax indicates that this institution
did not alter colonial backwards economic and political institutions.
The X-axis is expressed in years. The Y-axis is *not* growth, but
response to equilibrium. That is, the reaction of one sector once the
other one is shocked.[^81]

suggests that all ‘developed’ countries switched from an economic
backwardness equilibrium to a modern economic growth strategy after the
income tax was implemented, indicating a change in the institutional
order. For example, a shock to industrial growth in Chile before the tax
has a positive and increasing effect on agriculture. However, after the
income tax is adopted, a shock on industry has a negligible effect on
agricultural output. This suggests that the political institutions
before the tax were oriented to channel all economic resources in a way
that advantaged the agricultural sector and the landed elites. This
situation was reversed after the income tax law causing long-term
balanced economic growth. Colombia and Mexico show a similar pattern.
While the analyses on the Argentinean case suggest that there is a
long-term inter-sectoral relationship (), according to and this
relationship is weak, indicating weak inter-sectoral complementarity.
Nicaragua and Guatemala are the prototypical backward cases. In each
case, the economy was designed to develop the agricultural sector
completely at the expenses of the industrial sector. This goes in line
with the null findings of cointegration in and Granger-causality tests
in . In these cases the effect of a shock to agricultural output on
industrial output is zero both before and after the implementation of
the income tax law, suggesting a situation of *unbalanced* economic
growth. The political correlate is the lack of a strong political
challenger. suggests that the industrial sector was always weak,
indicating that their corresponding political elites were unable to
contest the landowning class. In both cases the implementation of the
income tax did not reverse the initial economic backwardness equilibrium
because when implemented, it did not reflect the inter-sectoral cleavage
(because there was no cleavage). The lack of sectoral challenges and
compromises left the traditional institutional order unaltered,
preserving the political advantages the landowning elites enjoyed since
colonial times.

Discussion\[discussion\]
========================

Historically, agriculturalists were a hegemonic group protected by norms
and institutions since colonial times. However, the emergence of the
industrial sector imposed tight constraints on the way politics was run
by the incumbent landowning class. The emergence of the industrial
sector lowered the levels of inter-sectoral inequality making possible
higher levels of inter-sectoral contestation, forcing industrial and
agricultural political elites to make institutional agreements. I
identify one such compromise, the implementation of the income tax.

I theorized that when the income tax was implemented under politically
contested circumstances, this institution expanded the overall state
capacities, crystallizing a series of reforms that replaced the old
institutional order inherited since colonial times, fostering long-term
balanced/modern economic growth. In turn, balanced growth reinforced
sectoral inter-dependence, precluding sectoral dominance of either
political elite. Such compromises took place during the formative years
of the Chilean state and during a period of structural indetermination,
where no elite had a clear economic/military/political advantage.
Particularly, industrial elites were being excluded from politics, and
they accepted to be income taxed in exchange of being allowed to
participate in politics under fairer conditions. These series of
inter-elite bargains helped the state to expand its dominion by offering
different and new state services, improving the bureaucracy, and
critically, bonding conflicting elites in an path of mutual
institutional compliance.

My statistical analyses suggest that when the sectoral cleavage was high
the implementation of the income tax fostered balanced growth. That is,
when there was evidence in favor of integration and cointegration,
conditions were more favorable to generate balanced growth. I explain
that balanced growth secured egalitarian political conditions between
the two elites. The main findings are that the post income tax
institutional order fostered long-run balanced economic development,
keeping both elites politically accountable to one another. I find that
in both *strong* and *weak* cases, the pre income tax institutional
order was designed to give unfair economic advantages to the
agricultural sector. However, when the industrial elites were able to
challenge the landowning class, the new institutional order in which the
income tax was situated reversed that. I established these relationships
using Granger-causality tests. When sectoral contestation was high,
political contestation was high, and the income tax (as a state-making
institution) put countries in a path of long-run balanced economic
growth.

Appendix
========

According to most political economists, fiscal sociologists, development
economist and economic historians, fiscal capacities are a prerequisite
for state-building. Unfortunately, there have not been many attempts to
explain *why* and *how* state and fiscal capacities in the developing
world emerged.[^82] With a few exceptions, most efforts have been
devoted to understanding the relationship between the politics of
taxation and state capacities only in a limited number of European
cases. In a recently edited volume, @Monson2015 [3] explain that the
“New Fiscal History has furnished a valuable set of concepts and
questions but so far its scope has been limited to post-classical
Europe.”[^83] In fact, the bulk of research on Latin America has mostly
focused on *recent* tax reforms.[^84] However, the *origins* of the
Latin American *fiscal* state remain relatively unclear. Additionally,
since wars in Latin America have been rare,[^85] it is difficult to
extend models based on external threats originally developed to
understanding the medieval European case.[^86] Importantly, domestic
explanations such as the role of sectoral conflicts within a context of
economic structural transformation, taxation and state-building has been
overlooked.[^87] A few exceptions are @Gallo:1991kx [7-8],
@Beramendi2016 and @Saylor:2014aa [8] who consider elite conflicts to
study state-making and fiscal development in the developing world.[^88]
Building on the fiscal sociology paradigm, I propose that the
development of the modern fiscal apparatus in Chile was product of
sectoral conflicts and compromises that took place around in the 1920’s
between the industrial and agricultural political elites. The paper
presents several panel-data analyses covering almost 100 years of
sectoral outputs for a number of Latin American countries in an effort
to generalize the theory. Using Cox proportional hazard regressions I
model the *contribution* of each sector on the ‘hazard’ of implementing
the income tax law. I find that the emergence of the industrial sector
*accelerated* the implementation of the income tax while the expansion
of the agricultural sector *retarded* or even *precluded* fiscal
development.

![Causal
Mechanism\[causal:mechanism:fig:p1\]](/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Dissertation/Papers/IncomeTaxAdoption/causal_path.pdf)

I argue that the early implementation of the income tax in Latin America
was product of an inter-sectoral conflict that took place around in the
early 1900’s between the agricultural and industrial sectors. Initially,
Latin American political institutions and social norms largely inherited
from the colonial period were designed to serve the interests of the
landowning elites. However, the economic structural transformation
characterized by “a secular decline of agriculture and substantial
expansion of manufacturing”[^89] imposed tight constraints on the way
politics was run by the incumbent agricultural class. Given the initial
advantage of the landed elites, the emergence of the industrial sector
meant the reduction of inter-sectoral inequality. Lower levels of
inter-sectoral inequality posed credible political, economic and
military threats to agricultural incumbents, increasing the opportunity
costs of conflict, generating pressures for inter-elite compromises.
Analytically, the emergence of the industrial sector not only altered
the structure of the economy but also the inter-sectoral balance of
*political* power, triggering a series of inter-sectoral compromises.
Here I identify one such compromise, the implementation of the income
tax law.

In this paper I leverage a number of Cox regressions using comparative
data on a number of Latin American countries to suggest that a rapid
expanding industrial sector accelerated the implementation of the income
tax. To explore the causal mechanisms at work more deeply, I present the
Chilean case to show that industrial elites accepted to be income taxed
by agriculturalist incumbents in exchange of having a more open
political system and more state services. I explain that when the income
tax was implemented under politically contested circumstances (as it
happened in Chile), this institution expanded the overall state
capacities by crystallizing a series of reforms that replaced the old
institutional order inherited since colonial times. However, when the
income tax was imposed late in history, its implementation did not
reflect the *early foundational sectoral cleavage*, an important feature
according to the fiscal sociology, truncating the development of state
institutions. For example, Chile imposed the income tax law in 1924, and
the *Servicio de Impuestos Internos* is among the finest tax
institutions in Latin America. However, Guatemala imposed the income tax
law very late, in 1963, and by 1967 the national income tax office
employed 194 people, and only 9 of whom had graduated from college.[^90]
While Guatemala implemented the tax, the institution did not reflect the
preferences of both sectors. In fact, the law responded more to
exogenous forces. Particularly, the law was implemented by the US-backed
dictator Colonel Enrique Peralta Azurdia, not necessarily reflecting the
inter-sectoral domestic dynamics. In these kinds of scenarios,
landowners were never challenged and there were less pressures to
centralize the state, making further institutional investments less
likely. These results go in line with @Beramendi2016 [7] in that ‘so
long as agricultural elites are the dominant political power-holders in
society, then fiscal capacity should remain relatively small, because
such elites will prefer *not* to invest in greater fiscal
capacity.’[^91] Consequently, the tax was not important because of the
new revenue it collected,[^92] but because its implementation required a
series of sectoral compromises, triggering a series of other
institutional investments, such as the implementation of
checks-and-balances (to monitor tax spending) and the development of
skilled bureaucracies. Crucially, the knowledge and expertise the state
accumulated were transfered to other state institutions via spillovers,
augmenting the overall levels of *stateness*. For example, leveraging
historical earthquake data, @Bahamonde:2017ac finds that the income tax
increased the overall state capacities to reduce the death-toll of the
average earthquake in Chile.

In this paper I leverage a number of Cox regressions using comparative
data on a number of Latin American countries to suggest that a rapid
expanding industrial sector accelerated the implementation of the income
tax. To explore the causal mechanisms at work more deeply, I present the
Chilean case to show that industrial elites accepted to be income taxed
by agriculturalist incumbents in exchange of having a more open
political system and more state services. I explain that when the income
tax was implemented under politically contested circumstances (as it
happened in Chile), this institution expanded the overall state
capacities by crystallizing a series of alliances and reforms that
replaced the old institutional order inherited since colonial times.
However, when the income tax was imposed late in history, its
implementation did not reflect the *early foundational sectoral
cleavage*, an important feature according to the fiscal sociology,
truncating the development of state institutions. For example, Chile
imposed the income tax law in 1924, and the *Servicio de Impuestos
Internos* is among the finest tax institutions in Latin America.
However, Guatemala imposed the income tax law very late, in 1963, and by
1967 the national income tax office employed 194 people, and only 9 of
whom had graduated from college.[^93] While eventually Guatemala did
implement the tax, the institution was not product of a domestic
endogenous inter-sectoral agreement. In fact, the law responded more to
exogenous forces. Particularly, the law was implemented by the US-backed
dictator Colonel Enrique Peralta Azurdia, not necessarily reflecting the
inter-sectoral domestic dynamics. In these kinds of scenarios,
landowners were never challenged and there were less pressures to
centralize the state, making further institutional investments less
likely. These results go in line with @Beramendi2016 [7] in that ‘so
long as agricultural elites are the dominant political power-holders in
society, then fiscal capacity should remain relatively small, because
such elites will prefer *not* to invest in greater fiscal
capacity.’[^94] Consequently, the tax was not necessarily important
because of the new revenue it collected,[^95] but because its
implementation required a series of sectoral compromises, triggering a
series of other institutional investments, such as the implementation of
checks-and-balances (to monitor tax spending) and the development of
skilled bureaucracies. Crucially, the knowledge and expertise the state
accumulated were transfered to other state institutions via spillovers,
augmenting the overall levels of *stateness*. For example, leveraging
historical earthquake data, @Bahamonde:2017ac finds that the income tax
increased the overall state capacities to reduce the death-toll of the
average earthquake in Chile.

This argument is situated within the broader literature on political and
economic development. Particularly, the argument is situated within the
broader fiscal sociology paradigm, emphasizing how fiscal development
was important for state-making. And while some scholars situate the
relevant state-building critical juncture at the end of the colonial
period, before the class compromises I identify in this paper. For
example @Kurtz2009 [@Kurtz:2013aa] explains that the first critical
juncture corresponded to the post independence political economy,
stressing whether local rural elites recruited their workers through
servile means. In turn, @Soifer2015a [6] argues that the critical
tipping point was whether “local administrators were outsiders in the
communities in which they served.” Both critical junctures happened
*before* 1900. While the process of state-building started before 1900,
the paper identifies the income tax as an important *additional*
building block in that process.

Taxation and State Formation\[fiscal:sociology:p1\]
===================================================

According to the fiscal sociology approach, the great modern innovation
was not the rise of capitalism (Marx) nor the rise of modern bureaucracy
(Weber), but the rise of the “tax state,” which developed institutions
to penetrate individual economies.[^96] It was Schumpeter who called for
a systematic study of public finances, and to treat taxation both as
cause and consequence of large-scale changes in the structure of the
economy and the state.[^97] I use this framework to contend that the
expansion of the fiscal system embodied especially in the implementation
of the income tax was the spring of the political structural
transformation that took place around in the 1900’s. Faster industrial
output nurtured a new demanding political elite, leading to a string of
institutional investments, setting countries in a long-term path of
institutional development. I agree with @Musgrave1992 [99]: since
taxation (especially on incomes) requires such a high degree of state
penetration, public finances offer the key for a theory of state
development.

The fiscal sociology paradigm is vast.[^98] Without trying to survey all
of it, this paper follows the classical approach famously suggested by
Schumpeter in that it sees “taxation in terms of group conflicts \[and\]
class interests.”[^99] Similarly, Seligman in 1895 argued that
“\[f\]iscal conditions are always an outcome of economic
relations,”[^100] while Goldscheid in 1925 famously argued that “tax
struggles are among the oldest forms of class struggle.”[^101] This
paper is situated within this classic tradition, emphasizing the
sectoral conflicts between agricultural and industrial elites in Latin
America. As others have argued, political development and particularly
“state formation will be more likely to the degree that powerful
individual actors form two groups on the basis of *divergent* economic
and political interests.”[^102] Since state centralization affects
landowners and industrialists in different ways,[^103] this approach is
especially relevant for the Latin American case. Agriculturalists
systematically resisted taxation as land fixity increased the risk
premium of their main asset,[^104] while industrialists’ preferences
toward taxation were more elastic as capital could be reinvested in
nontaxable sectors.[^105] Taxation has always been conflictual since it
has an important coercive element. As Martin et al. argue “a tax is not
a fee paid in direct exchange for a service, but rather an obligation to
contribute.”[^106] What makes taxation relevant, conflictual and
coercive is not the tribute itself (and the potential promise of
provision of public goods), but its compulsoriness. Regardless of an
individual’s race, religion, culture or any other kind of status, the
state classifies its subjects according to their incomes and oblige them
to pay, punishing whoever refuses to do so. From a sociological
standpoint, this “generality makes taxation a crucial element in the
development of the ‘imagined community’ (@Anderson2006a) \[...\]
Taxation enmeshes us in the web of generalized reciprocity that
constitutes modern society.”[^107]

Not all kinds of taxes have the same level of positive impact on
state-building. Indirect taxes do not need to develop a strong fiscal
apparatus.[^108] According to @Best1976 [53], “indirect taxes are but
substitutes for direct taxes,”[^109] and hence they are typically
administered by weak states.[^110] Since indirect taxes are, *ceteris
paribus*, easier to levy,[^111] this kind of revenue is generally
considered “unearned income”[^112] or “easy-to-collect source of
revenues.”[^113] Given the relatively lower costs states have to incur
to collect them, indirect taxes have a very low impact on
state-building. In fact, when early Latin American states depended
heavily on international trade taxes, the state apparatus tended to be
less developed.[^114] Since customs administrations in the region have
always been concentrated in a few critical locations, eespecially ports,
tariffs and customs duties did not require an elaborate fiscal
structure.[^115]

Direct taxes are more likely to produce long-lasting positive effects on
state-building. Since direct taxation involves a compulsory transfer
from private hands to the government sector for public purposes,[^116]
it is harder to collect,[^117] requiring stronger domestic alliances to
sustain these kinds of policies. Following the fiscal sociology
paradigm, in this paper I focus on the income tax. From a historical
standpoint, its introduction “was one of the major events in fiscal
history that contributed to the growth in *government* observed during
the past 150 years.”[^118] Since taxing incomes involves transforming
private income into public property,[^119] this form of taxation demands
the endogenous development of both stronger state institutions and
efficient monitoring and enforcement technologies.[^120] As others have
pointed out, “administrative constraints are identified as the main
constraint to the ability of states to collect \[the\] income
tax.”[^121] Political alliances should exist to overcome these logistic,
institutional and political domestic challenges. Critically, economic
elites, should agree to comply with the income tax.[^122] @Beramendi2016
argue that in fact Latin American “capitalist elites \[*preferred*\] to
shoulder a higher tax burden through progressive direct taxation, which
they \[viewed\] as the least-worst economic option,” fostering fiscal
expansion.[^123] Firstly, I contend that an elite divided on an
*economic* cleavage should be at the same time divided on their
*political* preferences, particularly regarding their attitude towards
state centralization.[^124] Elites split along economic interests should
then use state power to influence the institutional order in different
ways. Secondly, I contend that since tax revenues depend upon the
interests of different classes as they attempt to use state power for
their own purposes,[^125] class conflicts are more likely to resolve in
favor of direct taxation where income inequality *among the elite* is
low.[^126]

As depicted in , here I focus on how the emergence of the industrial
sector lowered the levels of inter-sectoral inequality making possible
higher levels of inter-sectoral contestation, forcing industrial and
agricultural political elites to make institutional agreements. Given
that similar degrees of sectoral economic development can be converted
into armies of similar capabilities,[^127] elites will have incentives
to make agreements rather than engaging in conflict when their
economic/military capacities are similar. For instance, in the next
section I explain how equally powerful elites managed to seek and get
support of different branches of the military. Analytically, lower
levels of inequality forced cooperation by generating credible military
threats to the incumbent elites. Furthermore, when levels of inter-elite
inequality were low (and military resources were more accessible for
both elites), war was more likely to exhaust all existent assets without
producing positive outcomes for either sector,[^128] increasing the
opportunity costs of conflict.

Unpacking the Mechanisms: Chile 1850-1950\[unpacking:p1\]
=========================================================

To provide some historical context, in this section I present the
Chilean case. As an economically and socially developed example,[^129]
this case should be able to show the inter-sectoral dynamics that
fostered institutional development. Particularly, this section shows how
the emergence of the industrial sector reduced inter-elite inequality,
generating credible threats to the agricultural landowners and promoting
sectoral agreements. I pay special attention to the conditions that led
to the implementation of the income tax law.

Historians still debate whether agriculturalists and industrialists
comprised two *different* elites. Some claim that this dualism is
incorrect.[^130] They argue that since landowners also invested in
industry,[^131] there was a blurry class division between the mining,
banking and agricultural sectors.[^132] I contend that there are a
series of facts that suggest that there was indeed a structural fracture
between the two sectors. Here I explain how there were certain practices
that mask the sectoral dualism. For example, it was common that
industrialists invested in real state. However, in many instances they
did so *just* to obtain credit. @Kirsch:1977aa [59] explains that “in a
*rural society* land offered one of the best guarantees for loans
\[since\] loans could not be secured by equipment, machinery, or
inventory. Only real estate was acceptable collateral.”[^133] In fact,
this practice shows how the credit system was oriented to give unfair
advantage to the landed elites. Similarly, @Zeitlin:1984aa [174] finds
that while there were some instances where there were mixed investments,
‘the combined ownership of capital and landed property was a distinctive
quality of *certain* of \[the elites’\] actors.’[^134] There were also
other instances where miners invested in banking. However, @Segall1953
argues that Chilean bankers, after the crisis of the mining sector
around the 1870s, acquired a number of mineral deposits given as
collateral years before, again suggesting that the lack of economic
dualism is rather apparent. Similarly, but for the Argentinean case,
@Hora2002 [609] explains that ‘the image of an entrepreneurial elite
with assets *scattered throughout several spheres of investment* does
not appear entirely correct.’[^135] And finally, @Bahamonde:2017aa
explains how the dual *structure* of the economy was *incompatible* with
a fully diversified investment portfolio. Concretely, he shows how in
some developed Latin American cases the structure of the economy was
designed to allocate resources *from* the land *to* the industries,
suggesting a situation of sectoral distinctiveness.

In all Latin American economies during and right after the colonial
period, agriculture was the most important sector.[^136] And by
extension, the economic interests of the agricultural elite were the
only economic interests represented in politics.[^137] For example,
@Collier:2002db [106] argue that initially the “national government was
dominated by the central part of the country, with owners of large
agricultural holdings playing a predominant role.”[^138] Moreover,
political institutions and social norms inherited from the colonial
period were designed to allocate economic inputs (and hence *growth*) in
a way that benefited the landowning class only.[^139]

There existed an important asymmetry. While the industrial sector was
growing, they were kept from participating in politics with the same
privileges and conditions landowners had. Consequently, it was easy for
the agricultural elite to produce policies that were designed to enhance
their sector. @Zeitlin:1984aa [13] argues that “landowners controlled
both the vote and the labor power of the agrarian tenants (*inquilinos*)
and dependent peasants (*minifundistas*), and this was the *sine qua
non* of their continuing political hegemony.” In Congress, and the
presidency itself, landowners were the single most important
group,[^140] leaving the modern sector heavily under-represented.[^141]
Consequently, fiscal pressures in favor of agricultural taxes were
minimal compared with mining taxes,[^142] leaving the agricultural
sector systematically - and substantially - undertaxed relative to other
sectors.[^143] Historians explain that “\[i\]n those areas where the
government did interfere in the countryside, the effect was to
strengthen the position of the landowning class.”[^144] For example, the
little public infrastructure that existed benefited the agricultural
sector.[^145]

For nearly 400 years, mining was the most important activity outside of
agriculture. Eventually, the mining sector failed to catch up with more
efficient technologies better suited to exploit low-grade ores,[^146]
and collapsed. After the mining boom, mining elites shifted their focus
to what is considered the first *true* industrial work which began under
agricultural auspices: the cotton mills.[^147] The first industries were
called *obrajes* and beyond textiles, early industrialists processed
other agricultural goods.[^148] The industrial sector was boosted by
favorable international conditions, many times stimulating a positive
complementarity between two industries. Industrial activities started
very small,[^149] progressing “from the shop to the factory during the
latter half of the nineteenth century.”[^150] Importantly, modern
industrialization did *not* begin with ISI, but around 1900.
@Bertola2012 [129] find that the “fact that manufacturing was alive and
thriving in Latin America before the 1929 crash is now beyond question.”
Similarly, @Haber2005 [2] finds that the “development of large-scale,
mechanized (and even “heavy”) industry can be dated back to the
1890s.”[^151]

In Chile, the industrial elite was composed by an incipient, yet strong
and cohesive group of individuals. Historian Francisco Encina explains
that the members of the non-agricultural class were ‘not only close
associates, or drawn from the same family, but they were the same
individuals.’[^152] In the process of going from mineowners to
proto-industrialists, this incipient elite developed a strong sense of
social *class*.[^153] Sectoral interests were organized as follows. The
*Sociedad de Fomento Fabril* (SOFOFA) was founded in 1883 to represent
the interests of the the industrial sector against the interests of the
agricultural sector, represented by the *Sociedad Nacional de
Agricultura* (SNA), founded 45 years earlier. The SNA “was the most
powerful associational interest group in nineteenth-century
Chile,”[^154] and according to @Wright1975 [51], it clearly thought of
itself as a social class. By the 1920s, industrialists started to “form
trade associations to engage in lobbying and propaganda as more coherent
interest groups.”[^155]

Both economic sectors were similarly developed but only agriculturalists
had access to fair political representation. This asymmetry led these
two ‘antagonistic elites’[^156] to confront in the civil wars of
1851-1859 and 1891 between a “large landed property \[elite against a\]
productive capital \[elite\].”[^157] President Balmaceda’s overthrowing
explains the sectoral nature of these conflicts. On the one hand, he was
mainly supported by the landed elites, but later overthrown in 1891 by a
mainly industrial/mining coalition.[^158] While his agenda on
“industrial” infrastructure (mainly roads and railroads) benefited
mostly agricultural areas,[^159] his attitude towards the banking sector
(closely linked to the mining sector)[^160] was ‘all but
confiscatory.’[^161] On the other hand, however, he failed to secure a
coalition with his own sector. @Zeitlin:1984aa [127] explains that the
‘decline of wheat exports \[...\] came precisely when a vast new market
for agriculture was growing in the nitrate territory.’ As the
agricultural sector supplied the industrial areas with foodstuff, it
simultaneously increased the *sectoral dependence* of the agricultural
elites on the industrial sector, forcing the “landed proprietors \[to\]
become dependent to a considerable extent on the continuing prosperity
of the major nitrate capitalists.”[^162] He explains that while biased
investments against the industrial class played an important role, the
sectoral economic dependence between the two sectors was the major
factor that mobilized both elites into the civil war of 1891.
Ultimately, this case illustrates the sectoral economic conflicts
between the two elites. While it would be inaccurate to say that
Balmaceda was *completely* supported by agriculturalists and
*completely* opposed by industrialists, this example illustrates how
(failed) inter-sectoral alliances and biased public goods provision
against industrialists led these two groups to a military conflict in
1891. Lower levels of inter-elite inequality gave both elites access to
military resources. While *Balmacedistas* managed to secure support with
of army, *congresistas* (the anti-Balmaceda group) managed to gather
support of the navy.

The conflict left a permanent scar in the Chilean society. While the
civil war lasted only nine months, it took 10,000 lives (out of a total
population of 3 million people) and cost more than \$ 100 million,[^163]
a significant amount for a small country. This legacy materialized in an
inefficient but politically stable political system for several years.
In part, the immobilism was due to the fact that the political reforms
that gave way to a ‘parliamentary’ system came from the conflicting
elites themselves.[^164] However, the intention to avoid more violence
(at least among the elites) tended to persist. For instance, while all
“ministers, counselors of state, members of the constituent congress
\[,\] municipal officials, provincial governors and intendants, members
of the judiciary and even the lowest functionaries and ordinary
employees of Balmaceda’s government were investigated \[or\] brought to
trial,”[^165] there were a number of amnesties issued. Similarly, there
were a number of *aborted* coups in 1907, 1912, 1915 and 1919.[^166] I
identify a third additional factor. War was more likely to exhaust all
existent assets without producing positive outcomes for either sector,
putting pressures for a sectoral compromise.[^167] Three institutional
components were considered: an income tax, industrial protectionism, and
equal access to the state. Here I focus on the first component.[^168]
The faster the industrial growth, the higher the pressures to impose a
tax to capture increasing industrial incomes. This is in line with
@Besley:2011aa [59] who argue that “investing in fiscal capacity becomes
more attractive \[...\] when wages or incomes \[...\] are higher.”[^169]
@Beramendi2016 also find that investments in fiscal capacities are
conditional on the expansion of the industrial sector.

The income tax law was passed in Chile in the middle of big political
instability. In 1920 President Alessandri obtained a very close victory
against Luis Barros Borgoño,[^170] who was supported by ‘the dominant
political and landed aristocracy.’[^171] Governability was seriously
compromised as the election let the senate in control of the landowning
class, who roundly opposed tax reforms.[^172] Particularly, the
opposition had ‘serious differences \[...\] over \[Alessandri’s\]
legislative program, eespecially in connection with the proposed income
tax.’[^173] Eventually, in 1924 the income tax law was passed. As others
explain, the non-agricultural “accepted taxation, *while demanding state
services and expecting to influence how tax revenues were spent*.”[^174]
The law taxed 2% on professional income above 2,400 pesos, 3.5% on net
profits in industry and commerce above the same sum, 5% on income from
mining, and 9% per cent on incomes from real estate.[^175] Humud (1969,
p. 154) explains that the income tax generated considerable resources,
and that the tax in “1930 \[it\] would become second only to import
duties in size.”[^176] In turn, the military was concerned with the
general budget situation. Salaries of army and navy officers ‘were two
months in arrears.’[^177] Famously, on September 3 of 1924 young
officials attend the galleries of the senate and made noise with their
sabers to demonstrate their discontent. After the resignation of the
entire cabinet, president Alessandri sided with the army in an effort to
accelerate the implementation of several pieces of legislation that have
been blocked by congress for months.

The implementation of the income tax in Chile was associated with the
implementation of other state institutions, expanding the bureaucratic
*dominion* of the state. However, unlike other ‘regular’ state
institutions and services, taxing incomes in fact infiltrated the
state’s coercive sovereignty unto the individual itself. It was the
practice of this technology that gave the state the big push allowing
the reproduction of its power in other areas throughout the territory.
Following the fiscal sociology paradigm, I contend that the more
effectively the state taxed its subjects, the more knowledge accumulated
performing *other* state activities. The knowledge and expertise the
state accumulated were transfered to other state institutions via
spillovers, augmenting the overall levels of *stateness*. For instance,
it was necessary to send official emissaries to check on accounting
books of the refinery in the north, the winery in the central valley and
the *hacienda* in the south. Eventually, these delegations became more
complex, increasing the density of state presence in the territory. For
instance, @Strayer:2005uq explains how official state delegations
traveled the territory dispensing judicial decisions, fostering state
centralization. @Bahamonde:2017ac finds that the conflict over the
implementation of the income tax generated alliances with subnational
elites, fostering sustained state-capacities throughout the territory.
Also, part of its effectiveness can be explained in that (1) elites
carried a big chunk of the burden, and that (2) the most influential
economic groups agreed on the implementation of the tax.[^178] In fact,
@Bergman2003 explains that Chile is one of the few successful cases of
tax compliance in Latin America.

![Industrial and Agricultural Outputs, and The Passage of the Income Tax
Law\[fig:incometax:p1\]](/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Dissertation/Papers/IncomeTaxAdoption/figure/incometax-1.pdf)

Econometric Analyses\[methods:p1\]
==================================

Following the economic development typology suggested in @Mahoney:2010aa
[5], nine polities were selected. Three ‘higher level’ countries
(Argentina, Chile and Venezuela), three ‘intermediate level’ countries
(Mexico, Colombia and Perú), and three ‘lower level’ countries (Ecuador,
Nicaragua and Guatemala). I proxy sectoral conflicts and specifically
the degree in which the industrial elites challenged incumbent
landowners by using industrial and agricultural sectoral growth rates as
presented in the [MOxLAD](http://moxlad-staging.herokuapp.com/home/en?)
data.[^179] The dataset spans from 1900 to (potentially) 2010.[^180]
According to @Astorga2005 [790], these data provide extended comparable
sectoral value-added series in constant purchasing power parity
prices.[^181] Using secondary information, states *when* the income tax
was implemented, which was the specific law, and its corresponding
source(s). shows both sectoral outputs (independent variables) and the
year when the income tax law was passed (dependent variable). Since
population has been associated with the probability elites expand the
franchise,[^182] and consequently the tax base, I include total
country-year population as a control variable.

<span> c c c C C</span>\
<span>**Country**</span> & <span>**Available Data**</span> &
<span>**Year Income Tax**</span> & <span>**Law**</span> &
<span>**Source**</span>\
\
\
Chile & 1900 - 2009 & 1924 & *Ley* 3996 & @Mamalakis:1976kx [20] and
[LeyChile.Cl](https://goo.gl/OMbImM) (official)\
\
\
Peru & 1929 - 2009 & 1934 & *Ley* 7904 & @GobiernodelPeru1934
(official)\
\
\
Venezuela & 1936 - 2006 & 1943 & *Ley* 20851 & *Gaceta Oficial*
(official) and @Ventura2013 [27]\
\
\
Colombia & 1900 - 2009 & 1935 & *Ley* 78 & @Figueroa2008a [9]\
\
\
Argentina & 1900 - 2010 & 1933 & *Ley* 11682 &
[Infoleg.Gob.Ar](https://goo.gl/UkWq7W) (official)\
\
\
Mexico & 1900 - 2009 & 1965 & *Ley de Impuesto sobre la Renta* &
@DiazGonzalez2013 [130-133] and [Diario Oficial](https://goo.gl/A3zDVJ)
(official)\
\
\
Ecuador & 1939 - 2007 & 1945 & - & @Aguilera2013 [135]\
\
\
Nicaragua & 1920 - 2009 & 1974 & *Ley* 662 &
[Legislacion.Asamblea.Gob.Ni](https://goo.gl/JGcA9p) (official)\
\
\
Guatemala & 1920 - 2009 & 1963 & *Decreto* 1559 & @De2007 [165]\

![Kaplan-Meier Curves: Size of the Industrial Sector and the Accelerated
Rate of the Imposition of Income Tax
Law\[fig:survival:plot\]](/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Dissertation/Papers/IncomeTaxAdoption/figure/survival:plot-1)

Before estimate the models, it is important to rule out the possibility
that income taxation and sectoral development are not linked through a
spurious, time-dependent relationship. The occurrence of the outcome of
interest (taxation) should not be directly related to time itself, but
to the rise of the industrial elite. Within the framework of survival
analyses, shows the failure rate of the sample average country of
implementing the income tax if industrial development had
increased/decreased by half (‘rapid’/‘slow’).[^183] The figure strongly
suggests that the implementation of the income tax law is largely
accelerated when the size of the industrial sector increases, and that
this relationship does not depend directly on time.

\[ph!\]

<span>c||c|c|c|c|c</span> & & & & &\

Manufacture Output$_{t-1}$ & 1.451$^{*}$ & & & &\
& (0.569) & & & &\
Agricultural Output$_{t-1}$ & -0.859 & & & &\
& (0.740) & & & &\
Total Population & -0.000$^{***}$ & & & &\
& (0.000) & & & &\
Manufacture Output$_{t-1}$ (ln) & & 1.279$^{\cdot}$ & & &\
& & (0.710) & & &\
Agricultural Output$_{t-1}$ (ln) & & -0.819 & & &\
& & (0.788) & & &\
Total Population (ln) & & -0.844 & 0.065 & 1.012$^{*}$ & -0.842\
& & (0.531) & (1.219) & (0.405) & (0.830)\
Manufacture Output (ln) & & & 1.543$^{***}$ & 0.970$^{***}$ & 1.277\
& & & (0.333) & (0.161) & (1.036)\
Agricultural Output (ln) & & & -1.107$^{**}$ & -1.185$^{***}$ & -0.818\
& & & (0.369) & (0.292) & (1.071)\
AIC & 22.788 & 25.093 & & 4135.812 & 25.091\
R$^2$ & 0.021 & 0.013 & & 0.392 & 0.013\
Max. R$^2$ & 0.078 & 0.080 & & 0.995 & 0.078\
Num. events & 9 & 9 & & 570 & 9\
Num. obs. & 281 & 272 & 842 & 842 & 281\
Missings & 0 & 0 & & 0 & 0\
PH test & 0.937 & 0.722 & & & 0.217\
Num. clust. & & & 9 & &\

shows 5 models.[^184] Following @Aidt2009a, Model 1 computes the lagged
conditional hazard ratio of a country which has not yet adopted the
income tax adopts it in a given year as a function of industrial and
agricultural outputs.[^185] Countries drop out of the sample when they
adopt the income tax. Model 2 is also a Cox regression, but with lagged
logged variables. By including time-transformed variables, in the form
of a lagged dependent variable (to account for partial adjustment of
behavior)[^186] or “the use of the natural log transformation \[to
capture\] different forms (or “shapes”) of the baseline hazard,”[^187]
Models 1 and 2 are especially well-equipped to account for possible time
dependency. Model 3 shows the estimated coefficients of a generalized
estimating equation (GEE). Generalized estimating equations were
introduced by @Liang1986 to fit clustered, repeated/correlated and panel
data.[^188] This method is especially well suited to binary data.[^189]
GEE methods require analysts to parameterize the working correlation
matrix. Though @Hedeker2006 [ 139] explain that “the GEE is robust to
misspecification of the correlation structure,”[^190] @Zorn2006 [338]
explains that whereas the choice of estimator makes little or no
difference, the unit on which the data are grouped makes a big
difference. Hence, following the advice of @Hardin2013 [166], who point
out that when “the observations are clustered (not collected over time)
\[...\] the exchangeable correlation structure” should be used, I assume
an “independence” working covariance structure, which also corrects for
small-sized panel designs.[^191] From a substantive standpoint, GEE
models provide an estimated marginal mean, or the *weighted average* of
all cluster-specific effects (or conditional means). Model 4 is a
conditional logit (or “fixed effects” model). One important advantage of
this strategy is the ability to account for country-specific effects.
For example, fiscal development could be a function of country-specific
prior state-building capacities.[^192] A number of scholars rightly
argue that post-colonial state capacities are in part a function of
pre-colonial state-capacities.[^193] Fixed-effects should be able to
account for this and other unobserved or hard-to-measure covariates,
which if left unaccounted for, would introduce omitted variable
biases.[^194] Model 5 accounts for possible spatial-temporal
dependence.[^195] Given that most of the countries I am modeling are
contiguous neighbors, it is reasonable to expect a “domino” effect.
Theoretically, being the first country in implementing the income tax
might not require the same level of domestic effort than being the last
one. Early-implementers might not have prior experience, being harder
for them to pass the law. To account for this possible spatial-temporal
dependence, a cumulative count of countries which have implemented the
law at time $t$ was included.[^196]

All in all, the models suggest that the rise of a strong industrial
sector largely accelerated the implementation of the income tax law.
Moreover, a strong agricultural sector not only has zero impact on
fiscal development, but a negative one (models 1, 3 and 4). Both pooled
results in model 3 and model 4 give the same results. I do not find that
there was spatial-temporal dependence (model 5).

![Hazard Rates of Implementing the Income Tax
Law\[fig:simulation:plots\]](/Users/hectorbahamonde/RU/Dissertation/Papers/IncomeTaxAdoption/figure/simulation:plots-1)

Using the estimations from Model 1 in , I follow @Gandrud2015 and
@King2000, and in simulate 1000 times the Hazard Rate of implementing
the income tax law conditional on industrial and agricultural growth
rates.[^197] While the outcome of interest does *not* depend *directly*
on time,[^198] sectoral outputs do grow in time.[^199] Consequently, it
will be necessary to account for this tendency by allowing estimations
to vary with time as well.[^200] Since the Hazard Rate “is the
probability that a case will fail at time $t$,”[^201] I take advantage
of this quantity of interest which allows some dependency on both time
*and* the covariates.[^202] strongly suggest that the faster the
agricultural sector develops, the less likely the implementation of the
income tax. This relationship does *not* change at later stages of
development, suggesting that polities with a strong agricultural elite
are not associated with fiscal development. However, rapid industrial
development is associated with the acceleration of the implementation of
the income tax law. The stronger the industrial sector, the faster the
tax is implemented.

These results suggest that given the initial advantage of the landed
elites, the secular emergence of the industrial sector also meant the
reduction of inter-sectoral inequality, generating political, economic
and military threats to the landed elites, which materialized into
sectoral agreements, particularly, the implementation of the income tax
law. From a substantive point, *when* countries implement their income
taxes is an important factor for state development. Particularly,
*early* implementation of the income tax situated the conflicts and
eventual sectoral agreements about the tax during the formative national
periods. In contrast, *late* implementers adopted this state-*making*
institution due to exogenous factors that did not necessarily responded
to the sectoral economic cleavage. Finally, analyzing the sectoral
*contribution* on fiscal expansion suggested to be a fruitful exercise.
These results suggest that only industrial expansion *accelerates* the
implementation of the income tax. Critically, agricultural expansion
*delays* it.

Discussion: Slow Industrial Growth and Lack of Contestation\[discussion:p1\]
============================================================================

Historically, agriculturalists were a hegemonic group protected by
practices inherited from institutions originated in colonial times.
These norms survived due to institutional inertia, perpetuating their
advantaged position. However, the emergence of a strong industrial elite
altered the inter-sectoral balance of political power, making
unsustainable the political monopoly run by the landed elites. Given the
initial advantage of the landed elites, the emergence of the industrial
sector reduced the levels of inter-sectoral inequality, in turn
generating political, economic and military threats to agricultural
incumbents. Moreover, low inequality also increased the opportunity
costs of conflict, putting pressures for inter-elite compromises.

The data analyses suggested that faster industrial growth accelerated
the hazard of implementing the income tax. I interpreted the Chilean
case through the lenses of the fiscal sociology paradigm, and leveraging
historical evidence I find that industrial elites accepted to be income
taxed by agriculturalist incumbents in exchange of having a more open
political system and industrial tariffs. Importantly, all these elite
compromises took place during the formative years of the Chilean state
and during a period of structural indetermination, where no elite had a
clear economic/military/political advantage, fostering the incorporation
of all major economic elites into the national project. When the income
tax was implemented under politically contested circumstances, this
institution expanded the overall state capacities by crystallizing a
series of reforms that replaced the old institutional order inherited
since colonial times. Given the initial advantage of the landed elites,
the emergence of a strong industrial sector increased levels of sectoral
contestation. Countries with low levels of state-capacities did
eventually implement the tax. However, later implementation had to do
more with exogenous forces, leaving unaltered the backwards
institutional order inherited since colonial times.

Both the argument and the findings are situated within the broader
literature on political and economic development, particularly within
the fiscal sociology paradigm, emphasizing how fiscal development was
important for state-making. Concretely, this paradigm proportionates a
theory of state-building as it links the mechanics between the state
effort of taxing incomes and the expansion of other state services.
Future research should explore more avenues of fiscal expansion,
emphasizing domestic channels of political development, particularly
considering different types of bargaining dynamics between the
agricultural and industrial elites in the continent. To the best of my
knowledge, @Beramendi2016 and this paper are among the few of such
accounts.[^203]

[^1]: I thank Robert Kaufman, Daniel Kelemen, Douglas Blair, Paul Poast,
    John Landon-Lane, Mark Pickup, Paul Kellstedt, Henry Thomson,
    Quintin Beazer and Ira Gang for all the helpful comments. I also
    thank the participants of the 75th Annual Conference of the Midwest
    Political Science Association, the School of Arts and Sciences and
    the Political Science Department at Rutgers for granting me a
    Pre-Dissertation Award (2016) that helped me to continue with this
    project. All errors are my own.

[^2]: @Johnson2016.

[^3]: The actual data availability might vary by case.

[^4]: For example, @Acemoglu:1996rm [293] explain that ‘all members of
    the elite have identical endowments so there is no heterogeneity
    among the elites.’ However, later in the book (p. 289) they briefly
    consider preferences over democracy of industrialists and
    agriculturalists. An alternative to the ‘bargaining’ model is the
    ‘compelling’ model proposed by @Boucoyannis2015a.

[^5]: See for example @Llavador2005.

[^6]: @Acemoglu:1996rm [289].

[^7]: @Robinson2006a [512].

[^8]: @Hirschman:1970bl and Ronald Rogowski in @Drake:1998pi [ch. 4].
    However, see @Bates1985 [15].

[^9]: @Tani1966 [157] explains that the absence of “wealth groups” makes
    passing an income tax law easier.

[^10]: @Boix:2015aa. For example, elites could use a faction of the
    existing army or hire private militias.

[^11]: Richard Salvucci in @Uribe-Uran:2001aa [48].

[^12]: @Bahamonde:2017ab.

[^13]: @Bahamonde:2017ac.

[^14]: @Johnston1961 [567].

[^15]: See @Ansell:2014ty and @Bahamonde:2017ab.

[^16]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^17]: Similarly, @Johnson2017 find that the link between state
    capacities and economic growth is conditional on several factors
    (population size, culture, population homo(hetero)geneity, among
    others). However, in my account, the role of the income tax is
    conditioned on the degree of intersectoral conflicts, which I
    measure via the size of the industrial sector.

[^18]: @Gollin2002 [160].

[^19]: @Jorgenson1961 [311]. Importantly, I follow @Kuznets:1967aa [87]
    in that “mining is combined with \[...\] industry because of the
    large scale of its productive unit, its close connection with
    manufacturing, and the distinctive trend in its share in product and
    resources.” Similarly, @Debowicz2014 [237] includes mining within
    the industrial sector.

[^20]: @Kelley:1972zl [8].

[^21]: This is a stylized theory. Of course, in reality, there are other
    economic activities such as logging, mining and others. Given its
    dependence on capital, mining has always been considered industrial.
    The Chilean case illustrates this.

[^22]: Emphasis is mine.

[^23]: @Streeten1959 [169]. Emphasis is mine.

[^24]: @Galenson1963 [506-507, 513] and @Baer1966 [95-96].

[^25]: @Johnston1961 [567] argue that this process “seems to be a
    necessary condition for cumulative and self-sustaining growth.”

[^26]: Emphasis is mine.

[^27]: @Federico:2008xd [40].

[^28]: Emphasis is mine.

[^29]: In fact @Landon-Lane2003 [2] find that an important source of
    growth in developing economies is “derived through the reallocation
    of resources \[particularly\] by drawing labour moving out of
    traditional sector employment into the modern sector.”

[^30]: @Bahamonde:2017ac.

[^31]: @Kelley:1972zl [133].

[^32]: @Ranis:1964uq [62].

[^33]: @McArthur2017.

[^34]: @Johnston1961 [571] and @Johnston1951 [507-508]. Similarly
    @Caselli2005 [723] explains that poorer economies have inefficient
    agricultural sectors which at the same time are the mayor source of
    employment.

[^35]: @Ranis:1964uq [7] and @Leibenstein:1957aa [51].

[^36]: Similarly, @Matsuyama1991 [621-622] points out that
    “\[i\]ndustrialization \[*consists of*\] a shift of resources from
    agriculture to manufacturing.”

[^37]: @Ranis:1964uq [114] argue that “labor reallocation \[...\] is the
    *inevitable* and *natural* consequence of the continuous expansion
    of agricultural labor productivity.” Emphases are mine.

[^38]: Emphasis is mine.

[^39]: See @Ranis:1964uq [203] and @Jorgenson1967 [289].

[^40]: Or as @Leibenstein1957 [102-103] puts it, “where the existing
    labor supply could cultivate more land without loss of efficiency.”
    In any case, @Sen1966b explains that a number of important
    predictions made by the dual sector model do not need this
    assumption to hold for the model to work. On a separate note,
    @Ranis:1964uq [99], @Skott1998 [280] and @Fields2004 [730] argue
    that a pool of *redundant* agricultural workers (a ‘reserve army’)
    is what prevents a rise in industrial wages.

[^41]: See @Jorgenson1961 [312] and @Ranis:1964uq [157].

[^42]: @Ohkawa1961 [21]. Emphasis is mine.

[^43]: @Nerlove1994 [14].

[^44]: @Kuznets1961a [45].

[^45]: @Ranis1961 [534].

[^46]: @Nicholls1963 [2].

[^47]: This idea also applies for Mexico. “The principal source of its
    wealth was not its mines, Humboldt noted, but agriculture.” Amaral
    and Doringo, in @Uribe-Uran:2001aa [13].

[^48]: See also @McBride:1971fv [15] who argues that “Chile’s people
    live on the soil. Her life is agricultural to the core. Her
    government has always been of farm owners. Her Congress is made up
    chiefly of rich landlords. Social life is dominated by families
    whose proudest possession is the ancestral estate.”

[^49]: @Bauer:2008kx [45].

[^50]: @Weaver:1980vn [107].

[^51]: @Collier:2002db [109].

[^52]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [23] argues that the civil wars challenged a
    “large landed property \[elite against a\] productive capital
    \[elite\].”

[^53]: Carmenza Gallo, in @Brautigam2008 [165]. Emphases are mine. She
    refers specifically to nitrate producers, one of the first
    industrial activities.

[^54]: Indirect taxes are easier to levy (@Krasner:1985lq [46],
    @Bertola2012 [132]), and hence this kind of revenue is generally
    considered “unearned income” (@Moore2004a [304]) or “easy-to-collect
    source of revenues” (@Coatsworth2002 [10]). Given the relatively
    lower costs states have to incur to collect them, indirect taxes
    have a very low impact on state-building (@Moore2004 [14]). In fact,
    when early Latin American states depended heavily on trade taxes,
    the state apparatus tended to be less developed (@Campbell1993
    [177]).

[^55]: They particularly argue that progressive taxation is better
    relative to “trade taxation, which can negatively impact the
    industrial sector” (p. 18). Similarly, @Best1976 [71] argues that
    the “taxes can be viewed as dependent upon the distribution of power
    rather than as an expression of the free choice of the majority of
    the people.”

[^56]: This is not an experimental design, and hence the term
    ‘causation’ should be taken loosely. Both @Beck1992 [241] and
    @Angrist:2008fk [237] Granger-causality is not really *causal*.

[^57]: See @Durr1992 [197] for a similar definition.

[^58]: The former measures “the output of the sector net of intermediate
    inputs and includes the cultivation of crops, livestock production,
    hunting, forestry and fishing.” The later “\[r\]eports the output of
    the sector net of intermediate inputs.”

[^59]: According to @Astorga2005 [790], this dataset provides extended
    *comparable* sectoral value-added series in constant purchasing
    power parity prices.

[^60]: Some countries implemented some kind of income tax before,
    however these laws lacked enforcement, they were weak or not at all
    followed. In in the Appendix section I establish the year that the
    literature seems to agree for when the law was implemented and
    properly enforced.

[^61]: Specifically, the tests were computed after estimating the
    reduced form VAR specified in .

[^62]: Except for the Mexico after the implementation of the income tax
    (p-value = $.06$).

[^63]: See especially next .

[^64]: Except for the pre income tax period test of Guatemala, which is
    significant at the $.1$ level.

[^65]: @Tiffin2003 [33].

[^66]: The order of integration could be higher than 1. However, for
    simplicity sake, I restrict my analyses to I(1) processes, which is
    the most common strategy in applied econometric analyses of time
    series.

[^67]: @Box-Steffensmeier:2014fe [129].

[^68]: See @Granger1981 and @Engle1987).

[^69]: @Durr1992 [193].

[^70]: I show the test statistic and its associated MacKinnon
    approximate p-value in parenthesis for the ADF and Phillips-Perron
    tests. Both trend and drift were tested in all tests, when
    applicable. As I did not find any differences, I show the test
    statistic with no trend nor drift and one lag. The lags in the KPSS
    test were selected via an automatic procedure. “$\dagger$” indicates
    that the test is barely significant or non-significant.

[^71]: I use VAR regressions, which do not necessarily need cointegrated
    vectors (see @Box-Steffensmeier:2014fe [161, 164]). Cointegration,
    however, is important from a substantive standpoint in this paper.

[^72]: @Box-Steffensmeier:2014fe [165].

[^73]: Since I am interested in the long-run equilibrium, I do not split
    the sample before and after the implementation of the income tax.

[^74]: @Wooldridge2002 [571]. Cointegrated vectors, ECM and VAR models
    are widely common in political science too. Just to mention some
    examples, refer to @Ostrom1992, @Krause1997, @Fish2007, @Haber2011,
    @Sobel2011, @Herzer2012 [489] and @Blaydes2011.

[^75]: @Ostrom1992 [142-143].

[^76]: @Box-Steffensmeier:2014fe [164].

[^77]: The next information criteria were used to determine the
    appropriate lag length: final prediction error, AIC, Schwarz’s
    Bayesian information criterion, Hannan and Quinn criterion as well
    as the corresponding likelihood-ratio test statistics. The same
    criteria are used to compute the optimal lag length in . The table
    also shows a summary of different post-estimation tests when the
    optimum lag length specified in the table was used. A check mark
    indicates that the tests was passed successfully, a check-minus mark
    indicates that the test was passed somewhat successfully, and a
    cross mark denotes failure to reject specification problems.
    Detailed results are available upon request.

[^78]: @Lutkepohl2004 [159].

[^79]: The raw VAR regression tables are available upon requests.

[^80]: @Stock2001 [106]. See also @Lutkepohl2005 [51].

[^81]: That is why the “shape of the \[IRFs\] indicate \[...\] the
    dynamic responses of the variables \[and since the variables\] are
    I(0) the impulse responses \[...\] should converge to zero”
    (@Enders2014 [364]).

[^82]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^83]: Some important exceptions are @Yun-Casalilla:2015zm and
    @Monson2015 who study a number of premodern states.

[^84]: @Fairfield2013 studies different strategies policymakers pursue
    to tax elites starting in 1990. @Mahon2004 and @Focanti2013 study
    the causes of tax reform in Latin America starting in the 1980s and
    1990, respectively. Similarly, @Ross2004 studies the relationship
    between taxation and representation between 1971 and 1997, whereas
    @Sokoloff2007a study the evolution of tax institutions comparing the
    U.S. with Latin America. See also @Sanchez2011 and @Bergman2003.

[^85]: @Centeno:2002qf.

[^86]: @Tilly:1992rr. See also @Besley2009.

[^87]: For example, @Schneider:2012rr [2] argues that even when
    “\[t\]here has been significant attention given to the role of
    revenues in building early Western European states, and even some
    attention given to formative moments of state-building in developing
    countries \[but\] we have limited insight into what happens when
    economies change significantly, with new leading sectors, new
    patterns of social organization, and new requirements of state
    authorities.”

[^88]: @Wheeler2011 studies how inter-elite cooperation and agreements
    positively impacted state-making in Europe.

[^89]: @Johnston1961 [567].

[^90]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^91]: Emphasis in original. See also for a similar approach
    @Ansell:2014ty and @Collier:2002db.

[^92]: Public economists usually focus on tax revenues. However, higher
    revenues do not mean higher stateness levels. For example, since
    American institutions were deliberately designed to limit the
    exercise of state power, the U.S. taxes very little
    (@Fukuyama:2004nr [6]). However, it is not reasonable to say that
    the U.S. has a \`\`weak state." Moreover, high taxation levels do
    not necessarily imply higher levels of state capacities either.
    @Kiser1992 [301] explain that in the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing
    (1644-1911) China, higher taxes were in fact “the result of rulers’
    lack of power. Chinese rulers consistently attempted to limit
    official’s excessive extractions from the masses, but were unable to
    do so.”

[^93]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^94]: Emphasis in original. See also for a similar approach
    @Ansell:2014ty and @Collier:2002db.

[^95]: Public economists usually focus on tax revenues. However, higher
    revenues do not mean higher stateness levels. For example, since
    American institutions were deliberately designed to limit the
    exercise of state power, the U.S. taxes very little
    (@Fukuyama:2004nr [6]). However, it is not reasonable to say that
    the U.S. has a \`\`weak state." Moreover, high taxation levels do
    not necessarily imply higher levels of state capacities either.
    @Kiser1992 [301] explain that in the Ming (1368-1644) and Qing
    (1644-1911) China, higher taxes were in fact “the result of rulers’
    lack of power. Chinese rulers consistently attempted to limit
    official’s excessive extractions from the masses, but were unable to
    do so.”

[^96]: @Moore2004a [298]. See epigraphs (@Schumpeter:1991yq [100] and
    @Lewis:1965nr [42]). This argument has been famously developed by
    @Levi:1989lq as well.

[^97]: Martin et al. (in @Martin2009a [2]). See also @Schneider:2012rr
    [35] who argues that “\[p\]ublic finances are causal and
    symptomatic. Revenues are necessary to build states; the act of
    gathering revenues structures societies; productive societies and
    capable states generate revenues.”

[^98]: For an excellent overview of both classic and new fiscal
    sociology refer to @Martin2009a [Ch. 1].

[^99]: @Monson2015 [14].

[^100]: In @Martin2009a [7].

[^101]: In @Campbell1993 [168].

[^102]: @Hechter1980a [1085]. Emphasis is mine

[^103]: @Acemoglu:1996rm [289].

[^104]: @Robinson2006a [512].

[^105]: @Hirschman:1970bl and Ronald Rogowski in @Drake:1998pi [ch. 4].
    However, see @Bates1985 [15].

[^106]: in @Martin2009a [3].

[^107]: Martin et al. (in @Martin2009a [3]).

[^108]: However, see @Brewer1990 [56]. The English state made extensive
    use of its navy to prevent smuggling and enforce the excise, an
    indirect tax. The excise employed an important number of state
    agents and helped to develop skilled state bureaucracies and an
    efficient fiscal system.

[^109]: However, under certain circumstances, indirect taxes are more
    efficient. @Kiser1994 [291] explains that when the levels of tax
    variability are high, direct taxation can actually have negative
    effects, especially when overtaxation is a possibility.

[^110]: This view is also supported by @Moore2004 [14].

[^111]: @Krasner:1985lq [46] explains that “tariffs and export taxes are
    easier to obtain than direct taxes, which require high levels of
    bureaucratic skill and voluntary compliance.”

[^112]: @Moore2004a [304].

[^113]: @Coatsworth2002 [10].

[^114]: @Campbell1993 [177].

[^115]: @Bertola2012 [132].

[^116]: *Cfr.* Raja Chellia, “Trends in Taxation in Developing
    Countries,” in @Migdal:1988nr [282].

[^117]: @Kurtz:2013aa [62].

[^118]: @Aidt2009a [171]. Emphasis is mine.

[^119]: @Musgrave1992 [98].

[^120]: @Lieberman2002a [99].

[^121]: @DiJohn2006 [5].

[^122]: @Best1976 [71] argues that the “actual composition of taxes can
    be viewed as dependent upon the distribution of power rather than as
    an expression of the free choice of the majority of the people.”

[^123]: They particularly argue that progressive taxation is better
    relative to “trade taxation, which can negatively impact the
    industrial sector” (p. 18).

[^124]: See for example @Llavador2005.

[^125]: @Best1976 [50].

[^126]: @Tani1966 [157] explains that the absence of “wealth groups”
    makes passing an income tax law easier.

[^127]: @Boix:2015aa.

[^128]: Richard Salvucci in @Uribe-Uran:2001aa [48].

[^129]: @Mahoney:2010aa [5].

[^130]: See for example @Mamalakis:1976kx [125].

[^131]: @Kirsch:1977aa [57, 95] who cites @Bauer:2008kx. See also
    @Coatsworth2002 [23] argue that “\[t\]he only landowners that
    mattered in 19th century Latin American politics were those for whom
    land represented but one asset in a much broader portfolio.” In the
    same vein, @Bauer:2008kx [180] argues that “\[m\]iners and merchants
    bought haciendas but landowners in turn invested in banks, insurance
    companies, commercial firms and the incipient industrial sector.”

[^132]: @Bauer:2008kx [30, 44, 94, 108].

[^133]: Emphases are mine.

[^134]: Emphasis is mine.

[^135]: Emphasis is mine.

[^136]: @Keller1931 [13].

[^137]: @Wright1975 [45-46].

[^138]: Similarly, @McBride:1971fv [15] explains that “Chile’s people
    live on the soil. Her life is agricultural to the core. *Her
    government has always been of farm owners. Her Congress is made up
    chiefly of rich landlords*. Social life is dominated by families
    whose proudest possession is the ancestral estate.” Emphases are
    mine.

[^139]: @Bahamonde:2017aa.

[^140]: @Bauer:2008kx [45].

[^141]: As @Baland2008 [1748] argue, “\[c\]ongressional representation
    was heavily weighted in favor of rural districts.”

[^142]: As explained, mining was one of the first manifestations of
    industrial activity. For example, while an agricultural income tax
    was imposed, it was weak and abolished after the civil war of 1891.

[^143]: @Best1976 [56]. @Bauer:2008kx [81] provides a very plausible
    explanation for why the agricultural sector was “structurally”
    protected against taxation. As he explains, “\[t\]he availability of
    an easily accountable source of public revenue - bags of nitrate or
    bars of cooper - meant that any need for the Chilean government to
    intrude into the affairs of landowners was reduced \[...\] the state
    kept its political hands off the countryside until the overwhelming
    urban demands for more food and political support in the 1960s.”
    @Zeitlin:1984aa [38] also points out that “public revenues came
    almost exclusively from taxes on mining and its exports.”

[^144]: @Bauer:2008kx [118].

[^145]: @Rippy:1971rz
    [@Marichal:1989bh; @Zeitlin:1984aa; @Bauer:2008kx].

[^146]: @Kirsch:1977aa [53].

[^147]: See @Rippy:1971rz [231]. As @Bethell2008 [271] argues, “\[t\]he
    first power looms were brought \[in Perú, Ecuador, and Venezuela\]
    in the 1840s, 1850s; but in all three they were a failure, some of
    the early mills in Ecuador being destroyed by an earthquake. It was
    not until after 1890 that the textile industries of these nations
    began to operate with reasonable success. Guatemala’s first cotton
    mill was established in 1882, and between that date and 1910 a few
    mills appeared in Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Colombia.”

[^148]: For example, animal grease and tallow, dried and cured meats,
    flour, bread, beer, wines and spirits, being most of them for
    domestic consumption (@Bethell2008 [272]). Sugar was used in the
    production of chocolate, candies and biscuits (@Bertola2012 [129]).

[^149]: @Marichal:1989bh [@Rippy1948 68].

[^150]: @Rippy:1971rz [235].

[^151]: For example, @Rippy1948 and @Pfeiffer1952 explain that by the
    1870’s the carriage industry was on a firm basis.

[^152]: In @Zeitlin:1984aa [30], emphasis in original. He describes
    several last names which are still associated with the Chilean
    elite, such as Ossa, Edwards, Vicuña Mackenna, Matta, Goyenechea,
    Cousiño, Urmeneta, Gallo and Subercasaux. Emphasis in the original.
    Similarly, @Wright1975 [48] supports the thesis that nitrate
    development led to the development of an “incipient industrial
    establishment.”

[^153]: @Kirsch:1977aa [41] explains that the founding of the SOFOFA
    clearly reflected a “tension created by the *awareness* of the
    incongruence between the actual exploitation of economic forces and
    the potential that could be extracted from them through
    industrialization,” emphases are mine.

[^154]: @Wright1973 [244].

[^155]: @Weaver:1980vn [107].

[^156]: @Keller1931 [37-38].

[^157]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [23].

[^158]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [186].

[^159]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [124].

[^160]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [118].

[^161]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [175].

[^162]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [129].

[^163]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [86].

[^164]: @Collier:2002db [108].

[^165]: @Zeitlin:1984aa [87].

[^166]: @Collier:2002db [109].

[^167]: Similarly, @Geddes1991 argues that competition between two rival
    parties of about the same size creates clearer incentives to invest
    in political institutions.

[^168]: The SOFOFA pursued a very strong protectionist agenda.
    @Sokoloff2007a [122] explain that the expansion of “manufacturing
    production \[...\] helped to nurture the development of a powerful
    constituency for higher tariffs.” In fact, @Lederman2005 [53] finds
    that in Chile the timing of protectionist and income taxation cycles
    matches, suggesting the plausibility of the sectoral bargains that
    took place around in the 1920’s between the two elites. See for a
    similar view @Haber2005 [18].

[^169]: Similarly, see @Campbell1994 [647] who explain that “economic
    development should be directly related to individual and corporate
    income tax rates.”

[^170]: @Collier:1999rz [111].

[^171]: @Haring1931 [2].

[^172]: @Haring1931 [5].

[^173]: @Haring1931 [3].

[^174]: Carmenza Gallo, in @Brautigam2008 [165]. Emphases are mine. She
    refers specifically to the mining elites.

[^175]: @James1924 [552].

[^176]: @Bowman1982 [451-452].

[^177]: @Haring1931 [6].

[^178]: @Beramendi2016.

[^179]: “These data build on the studies and statistical abstracts of
    the Economic Commission for Latin America, but also rely on
    Mitchell’s International Historical Statistics, International
    Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics, the World Bank’s
    World Development Indicators and a variety of national sources.” I
    used the *agriculture value-added* and *manufacturing value-added*
    variables. The former measures “the output of the sector net of
    intermediate inputs and includes the cultivation of crops, livestock
    production, hunting, forestry and fishing.” The later “\[r\]eports
    the output of the sector net of intermediate inputs.” Both of them
    are expressed in local currency at 1970 constant prices.

[^180]: As I explain later, I test this argument within the duration
    model approach. Since countries are censored once they implement the
    income tax law, they leave the sample potentially before 2010.

[^181]: Using a similar strategy, @Thies2005a also uses data on taxation
    and compare those data between cross sections.

[^182]: @Engerman2005 [892-893].

[^183]: ‘Failure’ in this case means ‘implementing’ the income tax law.

[^184]: All tables were produced using the `texreg` package
    (@Leifeld:2013qr). All Cox models were computed using the
    `survival R` package (@Therneau:2015zr). The GEE logistic regression
    was computed using the `geepack` package (@Hojsgaard:2016). This
    paper was written in LaTeXusing the dynamic report `R` package
    `knitr` (@Xie:2016hl), for fully replicable research. The
    simulations were performed using the `simPH R` package
    (@Gandrud2015).

[^185]: I do not combine both variables nor do I construct an index.
    Since I am interested in the *contribution* of each individual
    sector in the acceleration of the implementation of the income tax
    law (keeping constant the other), keeping both variables separately
    is a better strategy. See .

[^186]: @Wawro2002.

[^187]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [75].

[^188]: @Zorn2006 [322].

[^189]: @Hanley2003a.

[^190]: @Carlin2001 [ 402] argue that “\[r\]elatively minor differences
    in estimates may arise depending on how the estimating equations are
    weighted, in particular within the generalized estimating equation
    (GEE) framework.” @Westgate2016 and @Gardiner2009 [ 227] make the
    same point.

[^191]: @Hardin2013 [166] explains that if “the number of panels is
    small, then the independence model may be the best; but \[analysts
    should\] calculate the sandwich estimate of variance for use with
    hypothesis tests and interpretation of coefficient,” which is what I
    report in .

[^192]: I thank Matthias vom Hau for this suggestion.

[^193]: @Wimmer2015a [10], @Mahoney:2010aa and @Lange2006 [1426].

[^194]: @Angrist:2008fk.

[^195]: I thank both Christopher Zorn and David Darmofal for this
    suggestion.

[^196]: I clustered the standard errors at the counting variable level.
    Clustering by the counting variable allows me to cluster by early or
    late implementers.

[^197]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [15] explain that the Hazard Rate is the
    most common quantity of interest analysts focus on. shows 90%
    confidence intervals.

[^198]: Please refer to .

[^199]: Please refer to .

[^200]: The economics literature refers to these kinds of time series
    ‘integrated’ or I(1) processes.

[^201]: @Licht2011 [231].

[^202]: @Box-Steffensmeier2004 [15].

[^203]: In p. 19, they argue that their ‘paper is among the first to
    systematically establish that fiscal development may take place even
    in the absence of interstate military competition and warfare.’
